---
layout: post
date:   2020-05-25
title:  1-3. Video Interview
note:   Kira Talent, interview preparation, questions, improvisation.
categories: blogUWAdmissions
permalink: /blog/1-3
---
This is part of a 3-part series on the University of Waterloo's application process.

Today's topic will be on the video interview.

While this interview is not a requirement for the application process, consider it mandatory as the applicant who does not do the interview will likely be passed over for an applicant who has. The video interview is hosted by Kira Talent and marked out of 5 points (used to be 3).

The video interview consists of a few short questions you will have to answer immediately, within a very limited timeframe (one to two minutes). Kira Talent does provide some practice questions, so you can answer these and review your recorded responses. According to students, the questions asked on the interview are typically of two forms: "Why Waterloo" and "Tell me about yourself".

I suggest that you prepare for this interview in the same way you would prepare for a job interview, by creating some responses to common interview questions and practicing them with another person. There will also be questions where you have not prepared an answer, so being able to think quickly and on the spot is an asset. Also make sure to use good presentation skills: for example, avoid filler sounds such as "um" or "ah". I also suggest you dress reasonably well.

You should have a stable internet connection during the interview process. A short video will play where a representative from UW will ask the question before Kira Talent begins recording the response. If something goes wrong, you can contact Kira Talent for help.

The important information to take away from this video is to treat the video interview as a real job interview, with preparation beforehand and the ability to adapt, improvise, and overcome in unexpected cases. This concludes the main parts of this 3-part series on the University of Waterloo's application process, covering high school course marks, the admission information form, and the video interview.

Check out:

* [1-F. The Right Fit](/blog/1-F)
* [1-2. Admission Information Form](/blog/1-2)
