---
layout: article
date:   2020-09-06
title:  2-1. Housing and Residence
note:   Housing, residence, meal plan, living, landlord, roommate, packing, what to bring.
categories: blogUWAcceptance
permalink: /blog/2-1
---
This is part of a 3-part series on preparation for first year at the University of Waterloo. In this series, I cover student housing, courses, and other administrative tasks. I will refer to the incoming student as "you".

Today's topic will be on student housing. After accepting and satisfying UW's conditional offer of admission, you will need some place to live. I will discuss two options: on-campus and off-campus, and the advantages and disadvantages of both.

# On-Campus (Residence)

On-campus [residence](https://uwaterloo.ca/housing/) requires a $500 deposit, which will be deducted from your final residence fee. You will have the chance to rank your choice of residence, and mention roommates you would like to room with. UW charges 4 months upfront.

The advantages of residence are:

* A guaranteed place to stay.
* It is relatively close to campus.
* It is housing with other first years, so it is easy to make friends/study groups.
* Parts of the residence that are not student rooms are kept clean by staff.
* It is close to a cafeteria in case you do not want to cook.

The disadvantages of residence are:

* It is expensive, costing over $800 per month.
* An additional expensive meal plan may be required in some residences.

For first year residence, the terms are as follows:

* S4: Residence, co-op, residence, co-op, (off-campus etc.)
* S8: Residence, residence, co-op, (off-campus etc.)

When the meal plan is required, less than half the money you actually paid ends up on your WatCard. You then get a 50% discount which expires after your first year of residence (typically end of 1B for both streams). It's literally as expensive as takeout but you're locked into it and it's cafeteria food. Personally I found the food alright even though it was overpriced.

## Residence Specifics

There are three groups of residence buildings:

* UW Place (the south group of residence buildings)
* V1, REV, MKV (the group of residence buildings northwest of Ring Road)
* CLV (the north group of residence buildings)

Additionally, there are the college residences such as St. Jerome's.

Confusingly, UWP refers to two locations:

* The south group of residence buildings.
* An actual building itself (in the aforementioned group).

UW Place (the group) is closest to the engineering buildings (and E7 in particular for ECE students). V1, REV, MKV is not too bad (a bit of extra walk but closer to MC which may be of interest to math students). CLV is far and mostly caters to upper years and grad students (particularly those with families). The college residences are also far but pretty good from what I hear.

I lived in CMH, which is the most modern residence in UW Place (the group) so it was pretty nice and it has air conditioning (excellent for the summer). However, it requires a meal plan.

# Off-Campus

Off-campus housing can be found through sites such as Facebook groups and Kijiji. However, demand for housing is very high in the fall term, and so 4-month sublets will be very expensive and disappear immediately. One-year leases are easier to sign for fall term, but have to be done several months in advance (I signed my lease at the end of January for September). Otherwise advertisements for sublets start a couple of months before the start of the next term as students get co-op offers.

Make sure to know your [tenant](https://www.reddit.com/r/uwaterloo/comments/hgm2vc/psa_know_your_tenant_rights_this_is_the_time_of/) legal [rights](https://www.ontario.ca/page/renting-ontario-your-rights) as some landlords overstep their bounds (massive deposits, failure to provide maintenance, cleaning fees). The UW subreddit has a [guide](https://www.reddit.com/r/uwaterloo/wiki/index#wiki_off-campus_housing) to off-campus housing but it is a bit out of date. You can also search for posts of previous students' landlords.

The advantages are:

* It might be less expensive depending on location and amenities.
* You have more flexibility depending on need as there are many places to choose from. For example, bedroom size, ensuite bathroom, kitchen and common area, etc.
* There are less restrictions than residence.

The disadvantages are:

* You have to search through postings.
* It is (possibly) further from campus.
* There may not be other first years to interact with.
* It is possible to have bad management/landlord. For example, illegal deposits, unaddressed maintenance problems.
* You will have to spend time and energy cooking, cleaning, and grocery shopping (or just get takeout/delivery every day).

## Landlord Specifics

Here is a list of landlords that aren't complete scum:

* Waterloo Off Campus Housing (WOCH) (excellent, would rent from again)
* WCRI (it's cooperative housing so basically like residence but off-campus and *really* close to E7)
* ~~BK Rents (kind of sketchy but reasonably decent)~~ So I'm starting to hear sketchy things from them so they're off this list

Independent landlords are hit and miss.

# Daily Commute

Remember that travel distance and time will be affected by external conditions, like weather (especially during the winter). Typically travel time is longer because of road crossings, stairs/elevators (to get out of room, and up to classrooms), traffic, getting mugged by geese at gunpoint, avoiding geese crap landmines, watching someone get murdered by the geese (because they couldn't afford the "protection fees"), and you'll probably be carrying a bag (that will be stolen by geese).

For real, geese are super used to humans and usually docile, you can walk within a metre of them and they just watch (unless it's spring in which case they get are extremely aggressive). Geese will hiss at you but they're actually pretty harmless.

In general, the area around campus and uptown Waterloo is very walkable. Plus, your WatCard is also your bus pass (for which you pay a discounted amount for the term as part of your fees). A bicycle is also a good way to travel and get exercise, although there is the possibility of it getting stolen. A solution to this is to have a bicycle that's crappier than all the others around yours, or to keep it in your room (which may or may not work depending on space and/or staff catching you if it's not allowed). CMH does have a WatCard-accessed bicycle storage room, accessible from the side of the building.

I personally had my bicycle stolen, so I ended up getting two locks and applying the above.

# Packing List

Here is a possible list of things to bring. It is not exhaustive. Omit or include extra items at your own discretion. Also, if you forget to bring something, you can always have it shipped/buy it later. You can also use UW's [packing list](https://uwaterloo.ca/campus-housing/packing-list) as a guide.

> "It's better to have it and not need it, than to need it and not have it."
> <footer class="blockquote-footer">Franz Kafka (I think, there's a bunch of similar ones)</footer>
{: class="blockquote" cite=""}

TODO UPDATE WITH PREVIOUS PACKING LISTS

## Clothing

* Indoor
* Outdoor
    * Hot weather (e.g. hat, sunglasses, bathing suit, goggles)
    * Cold weather (e.g. boots, jacket, scarf)
    * Precipitation such as rain, snow, volcanic ash (e.g. rubber boots, umbrella)
* Formal clothes (e.g. for interviews, ~~dates~~ not applicable)
* **Face masks**
* Other (e.g. All Hallows' Eve (Halloween) costume, LARPing, furry)
* Human skin suit (disguise kit)
* Hangars

## Sleep and Comfort

* Bedsheets
* Blankets
* Sleeping bag for sleepovers
* [Bl&aring;haj](https://www.ikea.com/us/en/p/blahaj-soft-toy-shark-90373590/)
* ~~Only~~Fan because it's so hot (and so are you ;) ) (unironically it's good to have if you don't have AC)
* Wall hooks
* Floor mat (excellent for your back)

## Laundry

* Detergent
* Dryer sheets
* Laundry basket/bag
* Payment method (e.g. coins for coin-operated machines)

## Toiletries

* Toothbrush
* Toothpaste
* Teeth
* Floss
* Orthodontic (e.g. retainer)
* Soap
* Shampoo
* [**Towel**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Hitchhiker%27s_Guide_to_the_Galaxy)
* Slippers
* Moisturizer
* Deodorant
* Comb/brush
* Nail clippers

## Health

* Vitamins
* Minerals
* Sample everything in the medicine cabinet to figure out which you like
* Pocket mask for CPR
* First aid kit
* Pedometer for counting your steps (try to get a high score!)

## Outdoor recreation

* Bicycle
* Helmet
* Bicycle lock
* Bicycle lock (e.g. for extra security)
* Bicycle lights
* Water bottle
* Sports equipment (e.g. frisbee, racket, ball, whistle)
* Anti-insect devices (e.g. swatter, zapper, mesh clothing)
* ~~Flesh~~Flashlight

## Indoor recreation

* Piano
* Sousaphone
* Board games
* Dice
* Vijya (video) games
* Wooden sword to hit people
* Woollen flail to hit people

## Electronicals

* Computer (e.g. laptop, desktop)
* Phone
* Supporting accessories (e.g. chargers, screwdrivers, power bar, solar panel, ethernet cable)
* Peripherals (e.g. monitor, mouse, keyboard, headphones, steering wheel)
* Storage (e.g. USB, SD, external hard drive, floppy discs)
* Hardware (e.g. Raspberry Jetson, multimeter, [breadboard](https://www.reddit.com/r/ECE/comments/e8uqu7/peanut_butter_banana_sandwich_on_a_toasty/))
* Gaming consoles (e.g. Game Boy Advance, Steam Deck)
* Batteries (e.g. AA, AAA, D, 357)
* Laptop security lock

## Office

* Paper (e.g. lined, graph, notebooks)
* Writing utensil (e.g. pencil, pen, dry-erase marker, eraser)
* **Calculator** (more detail in the [Onboarding](/blog/3-1#calculator) article)
* Pencil case
* Scissors
* Tape
* Stapler
* Three-hole punch
* Ruler
* Binder
* Chair (e.g. lawn, office, foldable)
* Scanner
* Books
* Bags (e.g. backpack)

You probably won't need a printer since there are plenty on campus and printing with your WatCard is cheap. If you do bring a printer make sure you can connect to it through a USB cable or Bluetooth as eduroam (the UW wifi network) will [not allow](https://uwaterloo.ca/campus-housing/technology) wireless printing.

## Documentation

* Identification (e.g. driver's licence, firearms licence)
* Wallet
* Emergency cash
* Passport
* [Papers please](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YFHHGETsxkE)
    * Should be easily accessible (e.g. <2 minutes to present)
* Finances

## Cooking

* Dishes (e.g. bowl, plate, container, cup)
* Cutlery (e.g. fork, knife, dessert spoon, ladle, spatula)
* Pot
* Pan
* Pressure cooker
* Instant coffee powder packets (pour in mouth when in a rush)
* Small resealable plastic sandwich bags
* Ingredients

## Cleaning

* Corrosive fluid (e.g. bleach)
* 99% isopropyl alcohol
* Sponges
* Dishwashing soap
* Paper towel

# Conclusion

As usual, for both on-campus and off-campus, you will most likely have to deal with roommates, and there is a possibility of getting bad ones. Clear communication is an important factor in maintaining house harmony.

The important information to take away is that there are advantages and disadvantages to both on-campus and off-campus housing. You must decide which of the advantages and disadvantages are more important, and find, if not ideal, an acceptable location to live. However, student housing is not the only part of first year preparation. I will discuss the next topic in the next post.

Check out:

* [2-2. Course Selection](/blog/2-2)
* [1-F. The Right Fit](/blog/1-F)
