---
layout: post
date:   2020-09-06
title:  2-3. Administrivia
note:   Fees, email, campus geography, streams
categories: blogUWAcceptance
permalink: /blog/2-3
---
This is part of a 3-part series on preparation for first year at the University of Waterloo.

Today's topic will be on other administrative tasks. I will talk about fees, email, the UW campus, and streams (also known as study/work sequences).

UW fees include mandatory fees, such as tuition and co-op, as well as optional fees, such as student societies. The exact amount you must pay can be found in [Quest](https://uwaterloo.ca/quest/), and can be paid through a [financial institution](https://uwaterloo.ca/finance/student-financial-services/how-become-fees-arranged). I suggest that you at least also support your student society, for example the Engineering Society (EngSoc) for engineers, as they have many useful resources such as r&eacute;sum&eacute; critiques and exam banks. WEEF is also a good organization to support as they maintain lab equipment and TAs.

You must also set up your email, as it is the primary means of communication with the university, either with the Registrar, academic advisors, or professors. How exactly to set up this email, I have no clue. I did it once and never did it again. Search engines are your friend. Perhaps [WatIAM](https://uwaterloo.ca/watiam/)?

All of the important buildings on the UW campus are either inside the ring road or just outside of it. Online maps such as Google maps and [UW's online map](https://www.uwaterloo.ca/map/) can help you navigate through these Geese-infested lands. The app [WatIsRain](https://github.com/luckytoilet/watisrain) is also useful if you want to spend even less time outdoors by allowing you to take the various indoor building connections.

The [stream or sequence](https://uwaterloo.ca/engineering/future-undergraduate-students/co-op-experience/co-op-studywork-sequences) determines which terms you will be on an academic study term or co-op work term. The stream 8 sequence starts with consecutive study terms, 1A and 1B, and then alternates between study and work terms until 4B. The stream 4F sequence starts with alternating study and work terms until 3A, when the 3B study term follows immediately after to sync with the rest of the program. There are slight differences in the stream 4 sequences, so make sure to check the [undergraduate calendar](https://ugradcalendar.uwaterloo.ca/page/Study-Work-Sequence).

The sequence in which you are placed is usually random. I speculate there is probably a 1/3 chance of being placed in stream 8 and a 2/3 chance of being placed in stream 4 for computer engineering, based on the 3 sections (1 in stream 8 and 2 in stream 4). It is possible to request a specific stream by contacting the university. How exactly, I have no clue. For those entering in 2018, 2019, and 2020, it was by emailing a specific email address. After you are placed in a stream, it is difficult to switch as many other students are also trying to do the same. Generally, it is easier to switch into stream 4 than it is to switch into stream 8. When streams are assigned you can find yours on the [stream lookup page](https://www.eng.uwaterloo.ca/StreamLookup.php).

Opinion: An upper year summarized the two streams:

> S4 - Easier to get first co-op, more school summer terms, doesn't compete with SEs in the same year, two sections (more people)
> S8 - More time to settle into university, 2 co-ops in third year instead of 2 in first year, more summer co-op terms, tends to have less competition with upper year ECEs and SEs, one section (less people)
> I heavily recommend stream 8. I'm struggling to think of any significant pros for stream 4.

Do note at the time of the upper year's writing, S4 referred to stream 4S (terms 3B-4A back-to-back), while the current stream is 4F (terms 3A-3B back-to-back which moves a co-op from third year to fourth year as compared to 4S).

I am in stream 4. Would I have done better in stream 8? I have no clue.

The important information to take away is to pay UW fees on time, to be able to access student emails, know how to navigate campus to get to classes, and know which stream to follow to be able to plan out courses and housing. This concludes the main parts of this 3-part series on preparation for first year at the University of Waterloo, covering student housing, courses, and other administrative tasks.

Check out:

* [2-F. Summer Before Start](/blog/2-F)
* [2-2. Course Selection](/blog/2-2)
