---
layout: post
date:   2021-01-08
title:  3-1. 1A Term and Onboarding Guide
note:   Organization, health, course academics, extracurriculars, online
categories: blogUW
permalink: /blog/3-1
---
This is part of a 10-part series on the experience at the University of Waterloo. In this 3-part arc, I cover 1A, preparing for co-op, and 1B. I will refer to the UW student as "you".

Today's topic will be on 1A. I will talk about organization, health (physical and mental), courses in general, specific courses, extracurriculars, and online learning.

1A is designed to ease you into the university workload. Of the six courses you take, only four of them have exams. 

# Organization

Organization is a critical skill. Your course syllabus will have your professor and TAs' contact information, office hours, deliverable deadlines, assessment dates, recommended or mandatory textbooks, and a general outline of the course.

## Notetaking

Notetaking is important as professors do not normally release their notes or lecture slides. Even if they do, notes and/or slides may be incomplete.

Handwriting is a part of the learning process and helps your brain retain information. While typing notes may seem faster, you will pay the cost later when you need to study for quizzes, tests, and exams. Also, you will have a hard time drawing diagrams, matrices, and integrals if you type exclusively.

The two most popular methods of taking notes are on paper and with an electronic pad/tablet. Paper (vs electronic):

* Paper is cheaper.
* Paper can be (more easily) lost.
* Paper takes more weight and space.
* Paper is more fragile.
* Paper reduces screen time.

Use whichever method works best for you. Normally, I use a Wacom tablet with my laptop. However, I found when I needed to take notes extremely rapidly (e.g. covering four weeks of lecture content in three days before my final exam), pen and paper was much faster.

Make sure you can easily decipher your notes after you take them. It is recommended that you re-organize them every day after class, and make a summary at the end of the term before the exam period. Making a summary is an important factor on how I survived Peter Levine's ECE 240.

## Time Management

Time management is important as you do not get reminders for deadlines. Miss one and the penalty can range from -10% to -100% per late day. Additionally, finding out that there are three deliverables due tonight is a nasty wake-up call.

A calendar and a to-do list are extremely useful tools for managing your assessments. I use Google Calendar almost exclusively, while other students use tools such as [Notion](https://www.notion.so/). It is a good idea to add all deadlines from your course syllabus to your time manager during the first week of class. Add your class schedule to your calendar as well. There are [several](https://schedule.uwaterloo.xyz/) external [tools](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/uwaterloo-schedule-export/kfdoehlfchipdmgngnabhaaggdmodgdk/) for exporting your schedule from [Quest](https://uwaterloo.ca/quest/), and [Portal](https://portal.uwaterloo.ca/#/calendar) also has a calendar. **Your class schedule may change from week to week**.

Once you have all of the deadlines, plan ahead so your workload isn't too heavy. I find that I can do 1-2 assignments per day after class, depending on how heavy the assignment is. Of course, labs, projects, and studying should also be planned out.

Procrastination: Everyone does it. At some point you will have to make a hard decision on which deliverable you're going to take an L.

Falling behind: Everyone has at least once. To catch up, start with examples and learn the theory behind the solutions. Go to office hours for help! Figure out how/why you've fallen behind and how to not do it again (or at least not make it worse).

## Other

An orgnanized living space will help your mind remain organized. Also, you should (if at all possible) separate your study/work and relaxation spaces. See [CGP Grey's video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=snAhsXyO3Ck) on this.

# Health

## Physical

There are many pieces of advice out there that also apply to life in general. I will write the three I believe are the most important:

* Hydration: A lack of water will also impact memory and performance. Also, it will cause drowsiness and a lack of motivation.

* Sleep: A lack of sleep will impact your memory, which is not helpful at all when you need to learn, and will impact your performance on an assessment. A good, **consistent** sleep schedule is important.

* Physical activity: Exercise gets the blood moving, increasing flow to the brain and helps you retain energy. Breaks and short rests in general will help your brain get back to work later.

In my 1A term, my habits were extremely unhealthy, and the first two points are the most important physical factors to my difficulty transitioning to UW.

## Mental

> Engineering is hard. This never comes across. You will eventually understand. - Andre Masella

> We are all suffering together, yaaa! - Firas Mansour, ECE 105 professor

I don't have much to say about mental health, unfortunately. Here are some things:

* **You are not alone**.
* Good general physical health will improve mental health.
* There are many resources, both on-campus and off-campus. Use them!
* The [Reduced Load Program](https://uwaterloo.ca/engineering/current-undergraduate-students/first-year/reduced-load-program) exists, as well as the Verification of Illness Form (VIF) if you miss deadlines because of illness.

# Academics (coming soon)

LEARN, Crowdmark, Piazza, etc.

## Courses

## ECE 105

## ECE 150

## ECE 190

## GENE 191

## MATH 115

## MATH 117

# Extracurriculars

# Online Learning

# Conclusion

The important information to take away is to remain organized, keep up your health, know about the academics and extracurriculars in general, and hwo to deal with online learning. However, the 1A term is not the only part of the first year experience. I will discuss those next topics in the next 2 posts.

Check out:

* [3-2. Co-op (coming soon!)](/blog)
* [2-1. Housing and Residence](/blog/2-1)
