---
layout: article
date:   2021-05-31
title:  3-3. Co-op
note:   WaterlooWorks, CECA, resume, interview, rankings and matching, PD, work-term reflection (WTR), international, 8-month, courses
categories: blogUWOnboarding
permalink: /blog/3-3
---
This is part of a 4-part series on the first year experience at the University of Waterloo.

Today's topic will be on co-op. I will talk about CECA, WaterlooWorks (referred everywhere else in my site as WaterlooWorksn't), and applying for jobs.

The University of Waterloo has a strong co-op program because employers are interested in hiring UW students due to their reputation and because of the WaterlooWorks job board, which consolidates a large number of postings and allows students to apply with a few of the same clicks. However, just because you are in a co-op program does not guarantee you a job. You still have to do the work of making a good r&eacute;sum&eacute; and doing well in interviews.

This blog post is geared towards software development postings (and similar jobs).

# CECA

[CECA](https://uwaterloo.ca/co-operative-education/) has a bunch of acronyms and initialisms that constantly change, and I refuse to play along, so this is my name for the co-op administration. Like most administration at UW, CECA is generally competent when there are no special cases, exceptions, or urgency. CECA maintains WaterlooWorks, runs workshops, schedules interviews (and resolves conflicts), matches students to employers after rankings, nags students for (electronic) paperwork, and "resolves" student-employer disputes (most of the time in favour of the employer to the detriment of the student).

# Rounds

CECA maintains a [schedule](https://uwaterloo.ca/co-operative-education/important-dates) for the term, which contain all of the cycles (confusingly, these were previously called "rounds", and now rounds are a subset of cycles). A cycle consists of:

* One or two rounds where employers post jobs followed by students applying for those jobs.
* Employers reviewing r&eacute;sum&eacute;s and running interviews.
* Employers ranking students.
* Students ranking employers.
* Employer-student matching.

## Rankings and Matching

Rankings are from 1 to 10 inclusive, lower is better. When an employer gives an offer to a student, it shows up on WaterlooWorks as "1". 2 to 10 inclusive shows up as "Ranked", and if the employer doesn't want to hire the student at all, it shows up as "Not Ranked". Employers have the ability to rank multiple students the same number.

Once the employer rankings deadline has passed, students have 24 hours to rank employers. You are also allowed to rank multiple employers the same number (so if you really want to play it safe you can rank 1 for everything - assuming any employers ranked you). You also have three "Not Interested" rankings for the entire term, because even if you rank a job a 10, you still might be matched with it (this might not be good because reneging on a match has penalties, see below).

Matches are then made by going through each job posting and taking the lowest sum of employer and student ranking, making the match and removing the student and the employer from the pool. Ties are determined randomly. Once you are matched, you are taken out of the applicant pool and that is your co-op for next term. Ranking a 1 a 1 is a guaranteed match, which come out very quickly, typically within the first hour student rankings close. The rest of the matches are completed by the end of the day, usually early evening. If you do not get a congratulatory match message from CECA by late evening, you did not get matched and will have to try again next cycle.

CECA says you're not supposed to contact employers about rankings and vice-versa. However, this happens anyway, and very rarely is a student caught and punished for doing so. Employers are generally don't want to do any more admin work than necessary and are generally sympathetic to students (since they want to know if the offer is being taken as well). There is no rule against contacting other students during rankings day though.

### Cancellation and Reneging

While employers have the luxury of cancelling jobs with virtually no consequences even after matching, a student that reneges on a match will be banned from WaterlooWorks for the next two co-op search terms (I'm not sure what happens if you renege on your last co-op search though). So make sure you use those "Not Interested" ranks if you interviewed and then realized the job was completely different from the posting description.

Of course, if you're confident you're able to get jobs externally, then banning doesn't have much consequence.

### Match Examples

**Offer 1**:

|           | Employer 1 | Student | Total |
|-----------|------------|---------|-------|
| Student A | 1          | 1       | 2     |
| Student B | Ranked (2) | 1       | 3     |
{: class="table"}

Student A is matched to Employer 1.

**Offer 2**:

|           | Employer 1 | Student | Total |
|-----------|------------|---------|-------|
| Student A | 1          | 2       | 3     |
| Student B | Ranked (2) | 1       | 3     |
{: class="table"}

Either Student A or Student B is matched to Employer 1.

**Offer 3 Getting wrecked by ties**:

Let's say Student A really wanted Employer 2, but Employer 1 was their backup. Also, let's say that in Offer 2, Student B was matched with Employer 1.

|           | Employer 2 | Student | Total |
|-----------|------------|---------|-------|
| Student A | Ranked (2) | 1       | 3     |
| Student C | 1          | 2       | 3     |
{: class="table"}

Either Student A or Student C is matched to Employer 2. If Student C is matched to Employer 2, Student A is out of luck.

Worse, all Student A sees is "Ranked". So this might have been the scenario:

|           | Employer 2 | Student | Total |
|-----------|------------|---------|-------|
| Student A | Ranked (5) | 1       | 6     |
| Student C | 1          | 2       | 3     |
{: class="table"}

Have fun playing the lottery!

# WaterlooWorks

WaterlooWorks is the [job posting board and website](https://waterlooworks.uwaterloo.ca/home.htm) that students will interact with in order to get a job. This is where you upload your r&eacute;sum&eacute; and other documents (e.g. cover letter(s)), apply for jobs, see when your interviews are scheduled, submit an interview relief form for scheduling conflicts, see and submit your rankings, and see whether you've been matched.

You have +50 applications to use per round (possibly multiple rounds per cycle) and they are cumulative. I highly suggest using all of them for at least cycle 1 round 1, cycle 2 round 1, and cycle 3 (the first week of continous). Generally, the quality of postings are as follows:

* Cycle 1 round 1: Good.
* Cycle 1 round 2: Bad, most of the time the second round of a cycle does not have anything useful.
* Cycle 2 round 1: Good-ish, the jobs are slightly worse but the competition is less fierce.
* Cycle 2 round 2: Bad.
* Cycle 3: Good-ish.
* Cycle 4+: Bad, quality of jobs drops dramatically.

Jobs being posted are usually overwhelmingly software and there are thousands of postings. The level of experience for the job doesn't really matter (employers are lazy and just put all of junior, intermediate, senior for their posting). Make sure to filter by "For your program", and then you can continue filtering (e.g. by keyword).

Don't be too picky and/or set too high of a goal. For first co-op you want something like automated QA or webdev, and getting software development is really good. Avoid unrelated jobs and jobs that won't give you experience (e.g. IT, manual QA, summer camp counselor, etc.). In future terms, you can branch out to jobs that really interest you.

Hardware jobs are limited and generally upper years get them.

# R&eacute;sum&eacute;

A good r&eacute;sum&eacute; gets you to the interview.

Read my guide: [{{ site.url }}/resources/resume-guide](/resources/resume-guide)

Go to the Engineering Society and ECE Society r&eacute;sum&eacute; critiques. Get your peers and upper years to critique as well. Remember that it is YOUR r&eacute;sum&eacute; and you can choose to ignore advice, especially if you get conflicting ones.

DON'T go to CECA's critique, their advice is akin to the grade 10 Careers course or "boomer" advice.

# Cover Letter

Generally in tech/engineering, cover letters are not really a thing. However, some job postings will require them anyway. Generic cover letters are worse than submitting a completely blank page or your r&eacute;sum&eacute; as your cover letter.

If you want to write a cover letter, [be genuine](https://www.reddit.com/r/uwaterloo/comments/kxq90h/cover_letter_advice_for_tech_work/). A few sentences is all you need. However, you can go in-depth if you really think your past experience is exceptionally suited to the job.

Opinion: I think cover letters are a waste of both my time and the employer's time. Unless I *really* like the job, I submit a blank page (or if they ask for something specific, in which case I write it like an email). Others may agree or disagree with me.

> I am available for 4 months starting November 2007.
>
> Sincerely,
>
> Xierumeng
> <footer class="blockquote-footer">Xierumeng non-blank cover letter</footer>
{: class="blockquote" cite="https://xierumeng.github.io/blog/3-3"}

# Interview

Shorter interviews generally do not involve writing any code. However, this does not mean that interviewers won't grill you on your technical knowledge (e.g. object-oriented concepts) and problem solving skills. Also, always be prepared for behavioural questions.

Before the interview, do some research on the job posting and what the company does. If you want, you can also check out your interviewer's LinkedIn or other social media presence. Review your technical knowledge and prepare some answers to common behavioural questions (see below) as well as a summary of your career.

Forming a good first impression is important. On the day of the interview, make sure you are well-dressed, clean and groomed (please shower), and arrive to the Tatham Centre (TC) to check in a few minutes before your allotted interview time. It is not a fun time when you have to run across campus in the middle of summer wearing a suit with a heavy bag while also avoiding the geese poop landmines.

In terms of dress code, it is best to be at or one above the interviewer's dress level. Typically the minimum will business casual (i.e. collared shirt and dress pants), and it doesn't hurt to be overdressed.

If the interview is in-person, introduce yourself and give a firm ~~handshake~~ elbow touch. Remember to breathe, you got this!

Typically, there is only one interview before the employer decides on who to hire. However, for the elite employers, there may be coding challenges before you get the interview phase, then multiple interview rounds involving a behavioural interview, a virtual/phone technical interview, and possibly even multi-hour [on-site interviews](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eSqexFg74F8), similar to the application process for a full-time job.

Of course, things have changed since everything is online, but not much. Other than entering the virtual interview room instead of walking to TC, it's the same. Interviewers will have a more relaxed dress code, but you should still have at least a collared shirt on.

> I literally roll out of bed in tshirt into my interviews
> <footer class="blockquote-footer">Chris, a chad upper year classmate who gets more interviews, offers, and higher grades than me</footer>
{: class="blockquote" cite=""}

## Behavioural

Employers want to know if you will fit well into the team. Here are some common behavioural interview questions you should be prepared to answer:

* Why did you apply to this job?
    * I hate this question, I guess try not to simp too hard.
* Can you tell me about yourself?
    * This is an opportunity to summarize what you did on your past co-ops/side projects.
* What's your favourite project so far?
    * You can go into more technical detail now.
* [Could you tell me about a time you [resolved a conflict peacefully] with a teammate](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FDoH15ylAeo)?
    * Use the S.T.A.R. method.
* Have you ever been completely blocked on a task?
    * They're looking for problem-solving and team work here (and not being afraid to ask for help).

## Technical

Employers want to know if you can actually code. During the interview, the interviewer will give you a coding problem and you will solve it on a whiteboard or on a shared document. Usually these interviews are longer than 30 minutes, typically about an hour. However, don't count on it, I've had to complete a coding problem in 15 minutes during a 30 minute interview.

Generally, the coding challenges are the same or a variation of those found on coding practice sites such as [LeetCode](https://leetcode.com/) (or its rip-off [LintCode](https://www.lintcode.com/)) and [binarysearch](https://binarysearch.com/). In terms of difficulty, they tend to be from the easy to medium categories, but it's not unheard of to get a hard difficulty problem. **Make sure you know your algorithm and data structure basics well**, as they are your basic tools to start solving a problem you haven't seen before, and interviewers will ask you about the runtime and space complexity of your solution.

When solving the problem, make sure you are communicating your thoughts as the problem-solving process is an important aspect of the interview. Even if you don't solve the problem or don't solve the problem optimally, the interviewer still might like the way you think. Additionally, it demonstrates that you are able to communicate effectively. Take advantage of the whiteboard to draw diagrams and/or program flow (unfortunately, this is much more difficult on shared documents, but you can still write out test cases).

Interviewers may also give non-coding problems. This has happened to me twice so far.

Here are some types of problems:

* Low-level bit and memory manipulation.
* Graphs and trees.
* Complex data structures. This often involves support for two keys.
* Counting and sets.
* Arrays and strings.
* Stacks and history.

Here are things to consider when solving:

* Will inputs be valid?
* Will there be any integer over/underflows? Divide by zero?
* What to return if there's an error?

## Questions

There will be opportunities to ask questions during and at the end of the interview. Asking a good question also demonstrates your critical thinking skills and shows engagement. Questions could be:

* What's it like for you to work at the company? What do you like about working at the company?
* What is the expected compensation/salary/pay rate?
* How are tasks assigned out? Agile? What's the length of your sprints?
* Do you have any feedback for my interview?
* More recently: Is this going to be in-person, remote, or hybrid?

# External

Nothing is stopping you from applying to jobs externally, but it is a lot more difficult, as you are competing with the entire student population across Canada (and people from another country if you're planning to go international (e.g. Cali)). This is why WaterlooWorks is a huge advantage as you are only competing with UW students and you are not competing with as many since co-op terms are year-round rather than exclusively spring.

# International

Cali or bust has paid off with Cali? Now you need to actually travel to the U.S. Here's a [guide](https://stephenholiday.com/Unofficial-Waterloo-USA-Intern-Guide/).

# 8 Month Co-op

Changing streams is extremely difficult. Do not accept an 8-month co-op assuming you can change streams!

If you're in stream 8, it may be possible to do an 8-month co-op and switch into stream 4 before 3A (3B is when the streams are synchronized again). If you're in stream 4 and you want to do an 8-month co-op, you will have to drop to the next year, **in the same stream**. Since you will not be enrolled in an academic (school) term for 12 months, this will cause issues with financial aid such as OSAP. Additionally, it will cause you to delay graduation by a year. Be very careful about whether you want to make this decision, as it's typically not worth it.

# Courses over Co-op

You can take courses over co-op. For computer engineering students, it is at the [faculty of engineering rate](https://uwaterloo.ca/finance/student-financial-services/tuition-fee-schedules/fee-schedule-canadian-and-permanent-resident-undergraduates) regardless of the course's faculty ($1445 per course at the time of this writing). Example: Taking MUSIC 140 from the faculty of arts will still cost you $1445 even though for an arts student it costs them $683.

It may not seem worth it, but OSAP doesn't count parental income for part-time students, and they are very generous when granting money.

Keep in mind that your co-op comes first. If there is a conflict and your employer can't accomodate you, your co-op takes priority. Additionally, if you wish to take more than one course over co-op, you will need written permission from your employer.

# PD and Work-Term Reflections

Apparently back when PD didn't exist, employers complained that UW co-ops did not have good soft skills. Because of this, and also because UW get more money for having students "enrolled" in a course during their co-op, the PD program was created, mandatory for all students.

Also, some PDs now have reflective essays that must be written at the end of the course, and are a requirement to pass (fail and you also fail the course). For ECE students, three work-term reflections (WTR) of a couple of pages have replaced the three 20-page engineering work-term reports thanks to David Harris' efforts (thank you Dave!).

You complete two WTR over PD20 and PD21. PD22 also has an integrated reflection, and clears the ethics requirement, so I suggest taking it. Otherwise search Reddit for the least painful ones.

# Conclusion

The important information to take away is to know how to apply to jobs for co-op and work on getting an offer. However, co-op is not the only part of the first year experience. I will discuss the next topic in the next post.

# External Resources

* [Cracking the Coding Interiew book](https://www.crackingthecodinginterview.com/)
* [Elements of Programming Interviews book](https://elementsofprogramminginterviews.com/)
* [Harvard's course on preparing for technical interviews](https://cs50.harvard.edu/x/2021/prepare/)

Check out:

* [3-4. 1B (coming soon!)](/blog)
* [3-2. 1A](/blog/3-2)
