---
layout: article
date:   2023-01-01
title:  4-5. Electives
note:   Course experiences
categories: blogUWUpper
permalink: /blog/4-5
---
This is part of a 5-part series on the upper year experience at the University of Waterloo.

Today's topic will be on electives I have taken.

A lot of courses can be taken online through the [Centre for Extended Learning (CEL)](https://uwaterloo.ca/extended-learning/learn-online). Typically, the CEL course is easier than the regular verion. Another advantage of taking a CEL course is that it can be taken over co-op, but that will cost extra (more detail in my [co-op post](/blog/3-3)).

# Complementary Studies Electives

CSEs.

List A:

* MSCI 442 Impact of Information Systems on Organizations and Society

List C:

* CLAS 104 Classical Mythology (CEL)
* LS 101 Introduction to Legal Studies (CEL)

List D:

* MUSIC 246 Soundtracks: Music in Film (I thought it was list C but it's apparently MUSIC 256 that's list C, RIP)

Other list C courses considered:

* ECON 101 Introduction to Microeconomics
* ECON 102 Introduction to Macroeconomics
* HRM 200 Basic Human Resources Management
* MUSIC 140 Popular Music and Culture

Other list D courses considered:

* PHIL 145 Critical Thinking
* PHIL 256/PSYCH 256 Introduction to Cognitive Science

These lists are not exhaustive, there are plenty of other courses in the [undergraduate calendar](https://ugradcalendar.uwaterloo.ca/page/ENG-BASc-and-BSE-Complementary-Studies-Engineering).

## MSCI 442 Impact of Information Systems on Organizations and Society

List A. Taken in S20.

Basically an English HS course but focused on tech, similar to GENE 191. Lectures are skippable since you can read the blog posts on the website. 2 group videos, midterm essay, final essays. Essays are take-home.

## CLAS 104 Classical Mythology (CEL)

List C. Taken in W23.

TODO: Coming soon!

## LS 101 Introduction to Legal Studies (CEL)

List C. Taken in co-op 2 (between 1B and 2A).

Memorization-heavy course about Canada's legal system.

## MUSIC 246 Soundtracks: Music in Film

List D. Taken in co-op 5 (between 3B and 4A).

I thought it was list C but it's apparently MUSIC 256 that's list C, RIP. I wasted a bunch of money.

Memorization-heavy course about movie cues (synonym to song or score but for video).

# Natural Science Electives

NSEs.

List 1:

* ECE 405 Introduction to Quantum Mechanics

List 2:

* SCI 238 Introductory Astronomy (CEL)

Other list 2 courses considered:

* PHYS 263 Classical Mechanics and Special Relativity
* PHYS 275 Planets

These lists are not exhaustive, there are plenty of other courses in the [computer engineering](https://ugradcalendar.uwaterloo.ca/page/ENG-Computer-Engineering) and [electrical engineering](https://ugradcalendar.uwaterloo.ca/page/ENG-Electrical-Engineering) undergraduate calendars.

## ECE 405 Introduction to Quantum Mechanics

List 1. Taken in W23.

TODO: Coming soon!

## SCI 238 Introductory Astronomy (CEL)

List 2. Taken in co-op 6 (between 4A and 4B).

Easy assignments and easy quizzes, pretty much a HS course. No exams.

# Conclusion

The important information to take away is electives and being able to take them through CEL. This concludes the main parts of this 5-part series on the upper year experience at the University of Waterloo, covering 2A, 2B, 3A, 3B, and electives.

Check out:

* [4-F: USA Co-op (TODO: Coming soon!)](/blog)
* [4-4. 3B](/blog/4-4)
